This is a review of the 'Pure Engine' subproject (from now on, I will usually refer to it as 'project' without being confused with this repository contents as a whole). 
A conceptual overview will be given, and its documentation structure will be explained.

# 'Pure' engine

The idea behind the project itself is to create a match engine 'from scratch', without any specific objective or approach beforehand. 
What this actually means will be clarified in the rest of this documentation, and as the project itself takes shape.

The mode of development in this project is to start with the simplest possible football match 'simulation engine', and evolve it with certain of its aspects being developed. 
While I have a basic idea and outline of what these 'aspects' are or may be, I won't elaborate on them right now, as there is not a coherent terminology or categorization of them at the moment. 
Rather, these aspects will be 'revealed' and specified as this particular project is being developed, and in the same way as the project will be developed: incrementally.

I am calling the project's increments 'levels'. Each level will be a 'full' match engine simulation, in the sense that there will be some inputs and outputs, 
that will produce the impression of a football match being simulated. With each level, one (or more, but usually should be just one) 'aspect' of the match engine will be elaborated. 
Just a simple example of a potential 'elaboration': suppose our simple match engine simulates only the final score. 
The next level to this engine could be to make it calculate the actual shots taken by each team and then the goals scored. 
This is just a simple idea of how the increments/levels will evolve, and the specifics of that potential iteration don't matter at the moment 
(i.e. we may 'increment' it in a different way when we reach the implementation of that level).

This document will define each match engine 'level', based on certain aspects such as inputs, outputs, mechanism, etc. 
These aspects will be more rigorously defined as the project itself evolves, and more levels are implemented. With the definition and documentation of the sequence of levels, each iteration of the match engine, 
and the project as a whole, will be specified as succintly as possible. In addition, as each level will be autonomous, it will be able to be reused depending on the sophistication needs of a potential 'host project'.

## Why this (sub-)project?

As I hinted above, implementing and documenting each iteration as a 'level' has the advantages of clarity and reusability. What the evolution of the project will hopefully do is identify these aspects of a match engine that
make up its actual components and their variations. The more sophisticated a level is, the more it deserves to be its own project, and this is currently what's being done with the rest of the sub-projects 
(currently: MPN and 'Abstract Model'), which are just 'levels' in the present sub-project's terms, or 'approaches' in general. 
Exploring the different approaches (in an incremental manner, thus the term 'levels') to a match engine, we will be more aware of what we try to achieve with each approach/sub-project/increment/level along with 
its limitations, while we will have a rigorous roadmap towards a unified and complete ('ideal') approach, as a demonstration of a (not necessarily always straight) path from simplicity to accuracy.

# Levels

As mentioned above, the different aspects or dimensions that describe and define each level will be documented, as the match engine levels are developed in incremental fashion:

**Input**: Self-explanatory in the everyday sense, it consists of what the simulation uses as input, the way any program would use as its input. More specifically, and rigorously, what can be identified as input in our match engine is tactics and 'skill'. I believe that these two components can capture everything we need to define the input to a match engine simulation and a real match as a whole. Although I believe the meaning and how these two components can affect the "outcome" of a football match (another generic 'umbrella' term) are intuitive enough, they are very open-ended in their own right to be rigorous and accurate enough. Indeed, in this section we won't attempt to define or analyze them, but it's also crucial to stress this point. Rather, I would like to start a preliminary discussion with a few examples of what would tactics and 'skill' constitute and point out that the sophistication of their definition will vary with the sophistication of the corresponding level they describe.

* For tactics, the obvious value we would use is a combination of numbers that would reveal a team's formation, typically from three to five numbers, that add up to the number of outfield players starting in a football match. How a tactic would affect a match outcome would depend on the mechanism (see below) of our match engine. We could use a strictly data-oriented approach and try to exploit the provisional correlation of tactics employed and football match outcomes or integrate in our mechanism a more 'causation-oriented' approach that would explore of how a tactic changes the outcome in a more fine-grained fashion (rather than use it as just a collection of numbers, as mere data input). However, a formation definition does not make any sense in its own right in real life and this also is commonly understandable. I won't go into tactical theory at this point, but I would rather give a couple of examples of how tactics can be defined in more detail: player individual roles and instructions and player heatmap are two types of input that could be used as an addition or even alternative to the 'telephone number' definition of a formation.

* Regarding skill, things are even more open-ended, as there are multiple parameters that can define a player's individual skill. Combining skill and tactics (and maybe even player 'chemistry'), we get the whole that can be more or less than its parts. For now, I leave to your imagination (and mine) of how skill could be defined, although there are obvious ways inspired from relevant computer games. One more 'meta-parameter' of skill is its scope. I dicussed above about individual player skill, as this is what defines a team's skill. However, for the sake of simplicity, at the initial levels we won't go into detail about individual player characteristics and skill(s) but rather we are going to use a 'collective' team skill in the form of team rating which would be a common and reasonable abstraction for the initial levels.

**Output**: Or as mentioned above match 'outcome'. This can vary from just the final score to the match event and tracking data. Our match engine should be implemented in such a way that would demonstrate a clear causation between different 'output levels'. An example of two consecutive output levels is the final score vs. number of goal attempts.

**Mechanism**: How our match engine is implemented. It is too early to define the various ways and approaches, because this is the core of this project anyway and it is also a work in progress, especially the exploration of differences between different 'mechanisms'.

**Plausability**: How close are our match engine outcomes to real world outcomes? This I think is the more abstract and theoretical part of this project, and it won't be investigated 'to the end'. What constitutes a plausible outcome would be, for example, to have 'normal' scores. This is easily enforceable based on statistical data. Another particularly more difficult aspect is how the scores and results correspond to the real life (relative) strengths of opponents. An accurate verification of this would be achieved, for example, with comparing the simulated results with betting odds or other kinds of statistical predictions, but I think that going into that much detail would be out of scope and priority of this project. It suffices that the teams' rating (of which the relative attribution is a trivial endeavour) corresponds to their relative strength and favourites are always favourites anyway at a reasonable 'rule-of-thumb'-ish frequency. Regarding plausability, we also see how real life parameters and expectations form part of the 'business logic' of our simulation, and it is the requirement that couples it most tightly with the 'reality' that is simulated.

**Orientation**: This part relates more with the mechanism of the match engine. If the mechanism is the 'recipe' of the match engine, then the orientation is the 'main ingredient'. Orientation can be more easily and specifically defined than the mechanism which would descibe how the match engine works as a whole. It can also give a better idea of how the match engine is expected to work at a higher level, irrespective of the mechanism implemented. So far, I have identified four different 'orientations': data, algorithms (interventions), AI, formula.

* Data: This, I think, is the baseline orientation in a similar fashion to a Deep Learning project. In a way, I like to see this project as a very customized and simplified Deep Learning model, anyway. With enough data we can simulate any football match, by constructing out program in a way that lets data 'do all the work'. Literally, that would be an oversimplification for obvious reasons, but one aspect I would like to point out is the challenge of capturing and mapping other match engine 'aspects' with the data, and specifically tactics and skill. Regarding tactics, a 'correlation-based' approach was hinted above, where for example we could use the data of matches between a team that uses a '4-3-3' formation vs. a team that uses a '4-2-3-1' formation, as input to our corresponding simulation. Apart from the data's obvious importance and convenience as a basis for our and any simulation, it's also a means of providing 'out-of-the-box' plausability to our outcomes.

* Algorithms: I also mention them as 'interventions' or could be even referred to as 'corrections'. As mentioned above, data alone on top of a trivial 'processing' algorithm are not sufficient to simulate a football match. One particular reason for that at these early stages is the quantity and representativeness of the data. It is already demonstrated, even from the 'legacy' Openfootie project days, that even a data sample of one football match half can yield a very satisfactory variety of match outcomes. For a step further, still, we need a lot more data, among other things regarding key match events that can be under- or over-represented in our data sample (I am looking at you penalties). Until we have a very large number of data, on which we can already rely upon, we need to intevene with some corrective algorithms, that would process and use the provided data, but also evaluate alternative probabilities that bypass the data itself, so for example penalty kicks can be awarded even if they are not part of our data sample. Another case for intervention is also how the data is combined with input to our match engine, as the data sample by definition will have inputs that are different than the specific input we would like to use. In a pure 'data-oriented' approach this would be resolved by, for example, tagging the data and using it in correspondence to our input parameters with no or minimal 'algorithmic interventions', however it is more intuitive and quicker to combine data with custom logic.

* AI: It relates to how the agents (players) would behave in different scenarios and would make immense sense for 'behavioural plausability', as in computer games. Also, if we would simulate to the tracking data level, AI might be a pre-requisite to the 'truthness' of our match engine, as there would not be any room for 'creative abstractions' while the quality of AI could directly affect the quality of the outcome. For now, a data-oriented approach would suffice for the players to be doing the 'plausibly right' thing 'on average'. I have already notes for another document on this aspect, but it's not priority for now.

* Formula: This only occurred to me as an orientation while implementing the initial 'L0' iteration, as it is really too basic for an actual simulation. However, it's also the most obvious 'orientation' towards the goal of simplicity. Since, as you see below at the definition for L0, we only want to calculate the xG of opponent teams, and simulate the match flow based on that, using a formula is not only sufficient but also the most reasonable way to achieve it. This begs the question of how do we come up with a formula. Alternatively, we could use a 'data-oriented' approach based not on match data, but a combination of scores data and our subjective team rating. The latter approach could be a basis for a statistical distribution where random selection of a corresponding data point would determine the match outcome, direct or indirect. I wouldn't want to go down that path, as this approach, although more accurate and robust, would be further away from the spirit and path of a football simulation (or rather a bit out of its scope to be more exact). The formula in use was devised empirically on a few data points, without the need to overengineer the simulation at this stage with a 'data-oriented' approach, especially when that data are not match data but would be used as its alternative for simplification, and it seems plausible enough for the 'human eye', after a bit of tweaking.

## L0

Input: Skill (Scope: Team)

Output: Score

Mechanism: xG calculation based on team rating and team rating difference

Plausability: Empirical

Orientation: Formula
